The trojita IMAP Client
-----------------------

What is it?
-----------

At the time I started to work with e-mail on a more advanced level than a free
e-mail provider could offer, my quest for an advanced and standards-compliant
"Mail Client" (MUA) begun.  At first, I have no idea about various mail-related
protocols, but during the process, I learned the meaning of abbreviations like
SMTP, POP and IMAP.  As I'm a fan of open solutions, I have immediately put
proprietary protocols out of consideration.  This left me with essentially just
two choices for accessing my mail collection, either POP3 or IMAP4.

POP3 is an older protocol.  While it certainly has its advantages (it's really
simple to implement, for one), it wasn't designed for managing mail from
multiple places, and it doesn't really support multiple mailboxes.  As I used to
read my e-mails from at least four computers, I went on and had a closer look on
the only remaining protocol, the IMAP4.

Unlike POP, which was designed for retrieval of messages and wasn't designed
for use-cases where they remain on the central server, the IMAP is built in a
server-centric way.  The only place where the messages are kept permanently is
the IMAP server.  The protocol, defined in RFC 3501, offers a rich suite of
commands for both data access and data manipulation.  It is no longer needed to
download a whole 5MB mail that has three lines of text and a JPEG attachment
just because you wanted to see the text.  IMAP offers a comprehensive set of
commands for determining message structure, partial message retrieval and even
server-side message sorting based on message threading.

This power of IMAP is, however, often not exploited by today's IMAP clients.  In
fact, most of them are just dumb POP-clients upgraded to speak the IMAP
language.  Such clients are more vulnerable to various attacks (one
badly-formatted mail is parsed not only by the IMAP server, but then by the MUA
again, increasing the risk of buffer overflows and other security-related issue)
and are also wasting system resources.
